---
layout: post
title: The AgeGuess database
image:
  path: /assets/posts/2019-10-31-nature-scientific-data-ageguess-database.jpg
description: >
  An open online resource on chronological and perceived ages of people aged 5–100
# hide_description: true
category: science
---

- &nbsp;
{:toc .large-only}

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD026 MD033 MD041 -->

## Abstract

<p>In many developed countries, human life expectancy has doubled over the last
180 years. Underlying this higher life expectancy is a change in how we age.
Biomarkers of ageing are used to quantify changes in the aging process and to
determine biological age. Perceived age is such a biomarker that correlates with
biological age. Here we present a unique database rich with possibilities to
study the human ageing process. Using perceived age enables us to collect large
amounts of data on biological age through a citizen science project, where
people upload facial pictures and guess the ages of other people at <a
href="http://www.ageguess.org">www.ageguess.org</a>. The data on perceived age
we present here span birth cohorts from the years 1877 to 2012. The database
currently contains around 220,000 perceived age guesses. Almost 4500 citizen
scientists from over 120 countries of origin have uploaded ~4700 facial
photographs. Beyond studying the ageing process, the data present a wealth of
possibilities to study how humans guess ages and who is better at guessing
ages.</p> <table class="data last-table"><tbody><tr><td class="u-text-left
"><p>Measurement(s)</p></td><td class="u-text-left "><p>Demographics • perceived
age</p></td></tr><tr><td class="u-text-left "><p>Technology Type(s)</p></td><td
class="u-text-left "><p>digital curation • computational modeling technique •
Citizen Science crowd sourcing</p></td></tr><tr><td class="u-text-left
"><p>Factor Type(s)</p></td><td class="u-text-left "><p>age • sex • ethnicity •
birth country • age in photograph</p></td></tr><tr><td class="u-text-left
"><p>Sample Characteristic - Organism</p></td><td class="u-text-left "><p>Homo
sapiens</p></td></tr><tr><td class="u-text-left "><p>Sample Characteristic -
Location</p></td><td class="u-text-left
"><p>worldwide</p></td></tr></tbody></table> <p>Machine-accessible metadata file
describing the reported data: <a
href="https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.9934316">https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.
figshare.9934316</a></p>

## Background &amp; Summary

<p>Record life expectancy among the world’s countries has risen steadily by 3
months per year for the last 180 years. Underlying this remarkable
extension is a change in how we age. With rising life expectancies and
associated declines in fertility rates, senior citizens steadily increase as a
proportion of the population in most developed countries—a phenomenon known as
population ageing. Population ageing heralds a
suite of challenges for the economy, social security, and health care of
countries. Therefore, it is a pressing
task to understand how the human ageing process has changed over the last 100
years and to predict how it will continue to change in future. Here we present a
unique open-access database, rich with possibilities for studying ageing: the
AgeGuess database on people’s perceived ages (i.e. how old someone looks to
others) and chronological ages. The perceived age data originate from a citizen
science project, where people upload pictures, mostly of themselves, to the
webpage at <a href="http://www.ageguess.org">www.ageguess.org</a> and estimate
the ages of other users.</p>

<p>Perceived age is an established biomarker of
biological age. Biological age describes the relative condition of, for example,
the cardiovascular, metabolic, or immune system. Biological ageing is therefore
a change in functioning of these systems over time. It is usually determined by
measuring an array of biomarkers of molecular and cellular events, which then
are compared to a cohort average to determine biological age, but biomarkers of ageing are
as complex as the biological phenomenon itself. Perceived age emerges as an
excellent candidate biomarker for biological age that correlates with many
cognitive and physical functions and has been shown to even predict mortality
hazard for older people to a larger degree than chronological age. Using perceived age as a
biomarker for biological age gives ageing researchers a low-cost tool to widen
their traditional focus from the oldest-old to studying how biological age
already varies among young adults. Furthermore, photographs of
the same person at different ages allows to study within-individual progression
of ageing, while older photographs open up possibilities to study how the
relationship between chronological and perceived age shifts over time. Is a
40-year-old today biologically younger than a 40-year-old in the
1990’s?</p>

<p>How old we look to others does not only reveal our biological age,
it is also part of our identity and plays a role in how people interact with us.
Accordingly, perceived age is of interest to diverse disciplines, including
psychology, forensics, and computer science. Age as a biometric measure to
identify persons plays a role in the search of fugitives or other missing
persons, for many of whom images must be corrected for age progression of the
individual. Computer-aided ageing of facial images, and the estimation of age of
persons by computer vision, are salient tasks for computer scientists. Psychologists study the
cognition of estimating ages and are joined by sociologists in asking how age
affects human interactions and structures societies. While the AgeGuess database
was initiated by ageing researchers, it may hold answers to questions posed in
other fields.</p>

<p>Here we present a wealth of perceived age data spanning
birth cohorts from the years 1877 to 2012. The data were collected by a citizen
science project since 2012, where citizens upload facial pictures of individuals
with known age and guess the ages of faces on images uploaded by other users.
The data collection is ongoing. Almost 4500 citizen scientists from over 120
countries of origin have uploaded ~4,700 pictures (Figs&nbsp;<a
data-track="click" data-track-label="link" data-track-action="figure anchor"
href="/articles/s41597-019-0245-9#Fig1">1</a>, <a data-track="click"
data-track-label="link" data-track-action="figure anchor"
href="/articles/s41597-019-0245-9#Fig2">2a</a>). The citizen science project
continues to grow steadily (Fig.&nbsp;<a data-track="click"
data-track-label="link" data-track-action="figure anchor"
href="/articles/s41597-019-0245-9#Fig2">2b</a>). Communication by the media and
outreach activities on social media (Facebook: <a
href="http://www.facebook.com/ageguess.org/">www.facebook.com/ageguess.org/</a>,
Twitter: @ageguess_org) and in person (e.g. open science days) aim to both
recruit more users and to inform the public about the change in how we
age.</p>

<figure><figcaption><b id="Fig1"
class="c-article-section__figure-caption" data-test="figure-caption-text">Fig.
1</b></figcaption><picture><source
type="image/webp"
srcset="//media.springernature.com/lw685/springer-static/image/art%3A10.1038%
2Fs41597-019-0245-9/MediaObjects/41597_2019_245_Fig1_HTML.png?as=webp"><img
aria-describedby="Fig1"
src="https://media.springernature.com/full/springer-static/image/art%3A10.1038%2Fs41597-019-0245-9/MediaObjects/41597_2019_245_Fig1_HTML.png" alt="figure 1"
loading="lazy" width="685" height="488"></picture>

<p>AgeGuess users by country of origin (n = 4434).</p></figure>

<figure><figcaption><b id="Fig2" class="c-article-section__figure-caption"
data-test="figure-caption-text">Fig. 2</b></figcaption><picture><source
type="image/webp"
srcset="//media.springernature.com/lw685/springer-static/image/art%3A10.1038%
2Fs41597-019-0245-9/MediaObjects/41597_2019_245_Fig2_HTML.png?as=webp"><img
aria-describedby="Fig2"
src="https://media.springernature.com/full/springer-static/image/art%3A10.1038%2Fs41597-019-0245-9/MediaObjects/41597_2019_245_Fig2_HTML.png" alt="figure 2"
loading="lazy" width="685" height="478"></picture>

<p>Summary of perceived
age data in the AgeGuess database.<br>(<b>a</b>) Number of photographs by sex and
birth decade of individual (n = 4710).<br>(<b>b</b>) Cumulative numbers of users
over study year (n = 4434).</p></figure>

<p>In the
following, we introduce how we collect the data via a webpage and how we recruit
citizen scientists to participate in the project. We describe the database in
detail, providing both a summary of the data and the information on the database
variables. Finally, we critically reflect on the data quality showing that the
quality of data collected by the citizen scientists equals that of more
controlled studies. We end by suggesting areas of research that could exploit
the database.</p>

## Methods

### The webpage

#### Organisation

<p>The webpage at <a href="http://www.ageguess.org">www.ageguess.org</a> is the
platform we use to collect the perceived age data. The webpage is licensed under
a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives4.0 International
License. The webpage is hosted in France and has been approved by the Commission
nationale de l’informatique et des libertés (CNIL, National Commission on
Informatics and Liberty; declaration #1800944v0), France’s regulatory body
ensuring the application of data privacy law to the collection, storage, and use
of personal data. The webpage is built with Drupal (<a
href="http://www.drupal.org">www.drupal.org</a>), a free and open-source content
management system (CMS) based on PHP and MySQL. Drupal provides login/logout
functionalities and account activation and deletion. While users retain the
copyright of their pictures, the AgeGuess project owns the rights to use content
on the webpage covered by intellectual property rights, including text, images,
graphics, logos, icons, sounds, and software (see also Rules of AgeGuess and the
consent given when creating an account). The full terms and conditions are
available at <a
href="http://www.ageguess.org/legal-notice">www.ageguess.org/legal-notice</a>.
Below we describe the most prominent features of the webpage regarding data
collection. Further details about both the front and back-end structure and
behaviour of the webpage can be received upon request.</p>

#### Data collection

<p>To contribute to the data collection, users create an account with a verified
email address, link to or upload photographs of themselves and others, and
provide basic information about themselves—or others on their uploaded
photographs respectively: birth year, age in the photograph, ethnicity, and
birth country. (Note that “ethnicity” might be denoted more accurately by “race”
to reflect shared physical features and not cultural ones, but we keep using the
term “ethnicity” to guarantee coherence in the data collection). They can then
proceed to guess the ages of other users in these users’ photographs. After each
guess, the users see the real age of the person in the picture, summary
statistics of previous guesses of other users, and a histogram of previous age
guesses. Similarly, the user can see this information for their own photographs
on the user’s personal account page. As an additional feature, users can also
upload photographs of other people (e.g. relatives) for which the user owns the
copyright or that are available under Creative Commons license. The users
provide the same basic information for the persons in the photographs as they
provided for their own photographs and specify their relationship (i.e. friend
or family member). The minimum legal age to open an account is 14 years, but
pictures uploaded can show people of younger age.</p>

<p>To provide a further
incentive to contribute, the webpage is set up as a simple online game. For
uploading pictures and for each guess, the users receive a number of points
depending on the accuracy of the guess (exact guess 10 points, 1–2 years off 7
points, 3–5 years off 5 points, 6–10 years off 2 points, more than 10 years off
1 point, 10 points for each uploaded or linked picture). On their personal
account page, the user can see the cumulative number of gained points, the
number of guesses made, and the proportion of fully accurate guesses. At <a
href="http://www.ageguess.org/ranking">www.ageguess.org/ranking</a> users can
compare how good they are at guessing ages in comparison to other users by point
scores and by the mean deviation of their age guesses from the real age of
displayed persons. Deviations arise both due to the guesser’s uncertainty and
due to actual deviations of biological ages from real ages. Users can locate
their own position on ranking lists by clicking a provided button.</p>

<p>The
webpage displays photographs to users for guessing following a specific
algorithm, which creates a queue, an ordered list of photos that will be shown
to users to guess. To be eligible to be picked by the algorithm for display to a
user, pictures have to fulfil the following criteria: (1) not be uploaded by the
user themselves to prevent users rating their own pictures, (2) not being
guessed and/or seen already by the user, and (3) not being reported more than
four times. Users can report pictures when making guesses by clicking one of the
options: rotation needed, cropping needed, edited image, missing person, more
than one person, copyright infringement, and offensive content such as nudity or
violence. Considering these criteria, the algorithm sorts the pictures
ascendingly by number of previous guesses, placing photos with fewer guesses at
the top of the list. Pictures with the same number of guesses are chosen at
random. Furthermore, the user can skip a photo via a “skip” button, for example
to avoid guessing ages of people the user knows. The user can however not skip
more than 4 times per session. The system renews the queue each time a user logs
in.</p>

<p>It is worth noting that features of the algorithm and the overall
system were gradually refined over time with growing knowledge on users’
behaviour and potential problems. A suite of countermeasures against malicious
users are in place. For example, to reduce the number of malicious users, who
may upload unauthorised pictures, try to get access to pictures of other users,
and/or troll the webpage operations, the webpage requests email validation at
registration. We do not share the full details of these measures in order to
keep malicious users at a disadvantage.</p>

#### Obtaining the AgeGuess data

<p>Users with an active AgeGuess account can download the data described in the
next section from a repository at <a
href="http://www.ageguess.org/download">www.ageguess.org/download</a>. The data
for download are directly extracted from a MySQL database, so users have
continuously access to the most up-to-date data. Furthermore, a data version
dating from spring 2019 is available for download from the UK Data
Service. The data are released under a
Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International license
(CC BY-NC-SA 4.0). For attribution, we urge users to cite this paper when using
the data. All data are fully anonymised and any attempt to reveal the identity
of users violates AgeGuess terms of use. We do not publish the photographs
open-access to respect EU privacy protection law. While we cannot make the
photographs widely available, we are able to make bilateral agreements with
individual researchers or groups to ensure the use of the photographs is in line
with the consent obtained. This will involve drawing up a formal data sharing or
collaboration agreement. The nature of the agreement depends on the jurisdiction
and properties of the legal entity who enters the agreement and will be
finalised by the legal support of the AgeGuess project. Interested parties can
send a request using the contact form at <a
href="http://www.ageguess.org/contact">www.ageguess.org/contact</a> or send an
e-mail to contact@ageguess.org. Sharing of the photographs depends solely on a
legal agreement to ensure the use of the photographs is in line with the consent
obtained. We do not place any conditions on the re-use of the photographs with
respect to competitive re-analysis or to ensure special authorship rights for
the data generators.</p>

## Data Records

### History and internal organisation

<p>In 2012, U.K. Steiner and D. Misevic started the AgeGuess.org citizen science
project. They form the core committee and are responsible for creating and
updating protocols for data collection and for the overall infrastructure of the
database, as well as for securing funding. They are supported by webpage
building and database expert, J. Vieillefont, who created and maintains the
current version of the webpage and the database. The first fully functional
version of AgeGuess.org was coded by Charlotte Le Pesquer. Furthermore, a team
of scientific advisors spanning both academic disciplines (e.g. public health)
and industry (e.g. pension providers) helps shape the scientific directions of
the project and highlights funding opportunities. Depending on availability of
funding, one or more pre- or post-doctoral fellows have worked on data analysis
and outreach.</p>

### Variables and descriptions

<p>The most up-to-date version of the data is accessible to the public (i.e.
users with an user account at ageguess,org) as five csv files; for those who do
not have an account and do not want to create one a version dating from spring
2019 is available for download from the UK Data Service. The data that is continuously
and ongoing collected are stored in a MySQL database. These five csv data files
respectively contain information on <i>guess</i>, <i>photos</i>, <i>gamers</i>,
<i>quality</i>, and <i>report</i>, using those names with the prefix
“<i>ag_</i>” for AgeGuess and .csv extensions. In the following, we describe the
variables in each of the csv files. All missing data are encoded as
NA.</p>

<p>The <i>ag_guess</i>.<i>csv</i> file stores the information regarding
the age guesses using the following variables: <i>uid</i>, <i>guess_id</i>,
<i>photo_id</i>, <i>ageG</i>, <i>outG</i>, and <i>access</i>. The <i>uid</i>,
<i>guess_id</i>, and <i>photo_id</i> variables contain the individual
identifiers of the user who made the guess, the guess itself, and the photograph
guessed on. The <i>ageG</i> and <i>outG</i> variables describe the guessed age
and the deviation in the guess from the real age in years, respectively. The
access variables store the timestamp when the guess was made in date and time
UTC + 1:00 in the format ‘YYYY-MM-DD HH:MM:SS’. While repeated guessing by the
same person on the same photograph is no longer possible due to the current
version of the algorithm controlling the photos displayed to the users, this was
possible in early implementations of AgeGuess. Data on repeated guesses are
available from previous versions of the database upon request.</p>

<p>The
<i>ag_photos</i>.<i>csv</i> file stores the information regarding the
photographs using the following variables: <i>uid</i>, <i>photo_id</i>,
<i>age</i>, <i>relation</i>, <i>gender</i>, <i>ethnicity</i>,
<i>birth_country</i>, <i>birth_year</i>, <i>death_age</i>, and <i>created</i>.
The <i>uid</i> and <i>photo_id</i> variables represent the individual
identifiers the user who uploaded the photograph and of the photograph. The
<i>relation</i> variable indicates whether the photograph is of the user or of
another person to which the user has a relation (categories: user, unrelated of
friend, mother/father, son/daughter, sibling, half sibling, maternal/paternal
grandparent, maternal/paternal aunt/uncle, maternal/paternal cousin,
grandchild). The <i>gender</i>, <i>ethnicity</i>, <i>birth_country</i>,
<i>birth_year</i>, <i>death_age</i> variables contain the respective basic
demographic information for the person in the photograph. The <i>created</i>
variable stores the timestamp when the photograph was added in date and time
UTC + 1:00 in the format ‘YYYY-MM-DD HH:MM:SS’.</p>

<p>The
<i>ag_gamers</i>.<i>csv</i> file stores the information regarding the users (aka
gamers) with the following variables: <i>uid</i>, <i>g</i>, <i>ng</i>,
<i>points</i>, <i>gender</i>, <i>ethnicity</i>, <i>birth_country</i>,
<i>birth_year</i>, <i>access</i>, and <i>created</i>. These variables store the
individual identifier of the user (<i>uid</i>), the number of correct guesses
the user made (<i>g</i>), the number of other guesses (<i>ng</i>), and the
points gained in the online game (<i>points</i>). Furthermore, the file contains
the users’ basic demographic information regarding gender, ethnicity, birth
country, and birth year, stored in variables of these names. Finally, the
<i>access</i> and <i>created</i> variables store the timestamp in date and time
UTC + 1:00 of when the user last logged in and of when the user created an
account with AgeGuess, respectively.</p>

<p>The <i>ag_quality</i>.<i>csv</i> file
contains information on quality reports that users have made on photographs. The
variables are <i>uid</i>, <i>quality_id</i>, <i>photo_id</i>, <i>quality</i>,
and <i>created</i>. The <i>uid</i>, <i>quality_id</i>, and <i>photo_id</i>
variables contain the individual identifier of the user who made the assessment,
the identifier of the quality assessment, and of the photo on which the
assessment was made, respectively. Quality itself is encoded as 1 = high,
2 = medium, 3 = low in the <i>quality</i> variable. The timestamps of the
assessment in formats described above are stored in the <i>created</i>
variables.</p>

<p>Finally, the <i>ag_report</i>.<i>csv</i> file pertains to
information on any other reports made on photographs. The variables are
<i>uid</i>, <i>photo_id</i>, <i>report_id</i>, <i>comment</i>, and
<i>created</i>. The <i>uid</i>, <i>photo_id</i>, <i>and report_id</i> variables
store the individual identifiers of the user who made the report, the photograph
on which the report was made, and the report itself, respectively. Report
categories are <i>rotation needed</i>, <i>cropping needed</i>, <i>none or more
than one person</i>, <i>copyright infringement</i>, <i>offensive content</i>,
and combinations thereof. The AgeGuess team regularly edits photographs after
receiving a report, for example when cropping is needed, and retains the edited
photographs if suitable. Photographs and data associated to the other report
categories are deleted. Finally, after internal checks the system adds reports
related to missing photographs and inaccurate data on birth year and age. The
timestamps of the report in formats described above are stored in the
<i>created</i> variables. The <i>ag_quality</i>.<i>csv</i> and
<i>ag_report</i>.<i>csv</i> are mostly for system-intern use and the data are
not included in the distribution at <a
href="http://www.ageguess.org/download">www.ageguess.org/download</a> but can
easily be received on request.</p>

### Data summary

<p>After running the data cleaning protocol (see below), AgeGuess has, as of
spring 2019, 4434 users from ~120 countries of origin of which 2339 are female,
1757 male, and the rest is unknown (Fig.&nbsp;<a data-track="click"
data-track-label="link" data-track-action="figure anchor"
href="/articles/s41597-019-0245-9#Fig1">1</a>). Most users identified as
Caucasian/White (3024), followed by Asian (299), Hispanic (265), Black (120),
Other (208), and 518 users did not provide an answer. The users have uploaded
4710 photos of 2855 females and 1855 males (Fig.&nbsp;<a data-track="click"
data-track-label="link" data-track-action="figure anchor"
href="/articles/s41597-019-0245-9#Fig2">2</a>). The age of the persons displayed
in the photographs ranges from 5 to 100 years old. The earliest and latest
corresponding birth years were 1877 and 2012, respectively. The persons in the
photos were identified as Caucasian/White (3746), followed by Asian (343),
Hispanic (255), Black (103), and Other (246). The data contain repeated measures
on 519 individuals with more than 242 individuals having uploaded three or more
pictures of themselves.</p>

<p>Overall users have guessed ages 220,231times. We
have at least 10 repeated guesses for each photograph, with a maximum of 385
repeated guesses and a median of 42 guesses. The variation in number of guesses
stems from earlier versions of the photograph-selecting algorithm, which did not
account for the number of previous guesses on a photograph. The deviation of the
mean age guess from real age for each photograph is normally distributed with a
mean close to 0 (Fig.&nbsp;<a data-track="click" data-track-label="link"
data-track-action="figure anchor"
href="/articles/s41597-019-0245-9#Fig3">3a</a>). The relationship between mean
perceived age and real age for each photograph is shown in Fig.&nbsp;<a
data-track="click" data-track-label="link" data-track-action="figure anchor"
href="/articles/s41597-019-0245-9#Fig3">3b</a>.</p>

<figure><figcaption><b
id="Fig3" class="c-article-section__figure-caption"
data-test="figure-caption-text">Fig. 3</b></figcaption><picture><source
type="image/webp"
srcset="//media.springernature.com/lw685/springer-static/image/art%3A10.1038%
2Fs41597-019-0245-9/MediaObjects/41597_2019_245_Fig3_HTML.png?as=webp"><img
aria-describedby="Fig3"
src="https://media.springernature.com/full/springer-static/image/art%3A10.1038%2Fs41597-019-0245-9/MediaObjects/41597_2019_245_Fig3_HTML.png" alt="figure 3"
loading="lazy" width="685" height="482"></picture><p><br>(<b>a</b>) Frequency
distribution of the deviation of the mean guessed age from real age (n = 4710).
The green line marks no deviation between mean perceived and real age.
<br>(<b>b</b>) Mean perceived age plotted against real age. Each data point
represents the mean perceived age of one of the 4710 images. Data points
belonging to different birth decades are coloured differently.</p></figure>

### Technical validation

<p>The data originate from citizen scientists. Such data are often approached
with skepticism from the scientific community, even though citizen scientist
frequently perform equally well as trained scientists in collecting data. The data collected can
contain both false and missing data that may have been entered by users either
by mistake or intentionally. Therefore, we perform some basic data cleaning
steps before publication of the data and provide basic tests for data quality
and accuracy. From the <i>Guess</i> data we delete all guesses that are more
than two times the standard deviation away from the mean age guess on a
photograph. We further remove all guesses on photographs that have less than 10
guesses, since it is known that substantial uncertainty in rating ages
exists. This uncertainty mainly
arises within guessers among repeated guesses and to a much lower degree among
guessers. Simply put, a perceived age
estimate based on only a few guesses is less accurate than one based on more
than 10 guesses, and therefore, we exclude photos with less than 10 guesses to
improve data quality. Using the information in the <i>Report</i> data (see
above), we delete guesses on photos with inaccurate age or birth year. Since not
all inaccurate birth years are flagged by internal system checks, we replace in
both the <i>Photos</i> and <i>Gamers</i> data all unrealistic birth years
(&lt;1800 or &gt;2019) with NA. The whole, uncleaned data set can be obtained
upon request.</p>

<p>Furthermore, the data quality of the AgeGuess database is
subject to a trade-off common to many citizen science projects, where large
quantities of data are obtained at the expense of representativeness of sample
and data accuracy. Neither the AgeGuess users nor the persons displayed in the
photograph are representative samples of the population with respect to age,
geographic location, or ethnicity, though information on both the displayed
person in the images and the users is available to account for biases. Such
biases are also frequently found in classic scientific studies. Furthermore, the uploaded
photographs are not standardised with respect to posture, lighting, face
expression, clothing, background, distance to camera, hairstyle or dye, make-up,
or the use of accessories such as hats, jewellery, or glasses. Some of these
factors may be used to deliberately conceal age: older adults may use
particularly make-up and hair dye to appear younger, while younger adults may
manipulate their looks to appear older. A bias for older individuals being
perceived younger and younger individuals being perceived older has been shown
to be independent of such factors. We do discourage editing
photographs to alter the age appearance and offer a report option to flag those
photographs, however, some manipulated photographs may have remained
unnoticed.</p>

<p>We have no direct means to control the accuracy of the
chronological age users enter when uploading photographs. However, we can
indirectly detect large mistakes or deliberately provided false information by
identifying and excluding outliers. In certain citizen science projects concerns
arise due to the ability of the citizen scientists to accurately perform the
demanded tasks compared to classical trained scientists. For the database
presented here this should be of little concern. Previous highly controlled
scientific studies on perceived age rating showed that geriatric nurses, who
were considered experts in rating ages of older women, did not perform different
in rating ages compared to two other groups: young male students, who were
expected to be the worst raters, and same-aged peers, i.e. older women. Confidence in the collected
data also comes from small side-projects that allow us to assess the quality of
the data. For instance, 10 students at the University of Southern Denmark aimed
at outcompeting the users of AgeGuess, first by spending several weeks studying
scientific literature on factors that influence perceived age to train
themselves to be good at rating ages. When they rated ages on AgeGuess.org, they
were disappointed to not have performed any different than the users on
AgeGuess.org (data not published). Also, when comparing the variance (standard
deviation, SD) in the difference between chronological age and perceived age
between highly controlled studies and the AgeGuess data the
variance in the difference was comparative to the data generated by the citizen
scientists (6–8 in classical studies, 6.9 for the AgeGuess data). This
similarity in age estimation might not be expected since the images in the
controlled studies have been obtained under strict standardized settings, such
as controlled posture, lighting, face expression, clothing, background, distance
to camera, make-up, and without accessories such as hats, jewellery, or
glasses. Such standard settings should
lower variance. The classical studies partly included specific age groups, e.g.
some have included only persons above 70, and variance is increased for
judging the age of older individuals, as is also found in our data
where the variance at least of the oldest old is slightly higher compared to
very young persons guessed on (Fig.&nbsp;<a data-track="click"
data-track-label="link" data-track-action="figure anchor"
href="/articles/s41597-019-0245-9#Fig3">3b</a>). A limited age range can also
reduce the variance since the raters realize that the persons guessed on are
within such an age range.</p>

<p>Overall, the citizen
science data agrees with basic findings of controlled studies and shows similar
variances. Still, anyone using the data should be aware of the uncertainties
that come with a citizen science approach of collecting data and that such data
is prone to additional error and noise, even though we could not yet detect such
increased error. We therefore evaluate the data collected by the citizen
scientists to be largely accurate and that the quantity of the data (guesses
made) vastly outweighs the potential data quality issues, such as missing data
and data entered by mistake or intentionally erroneously entered.</p>

## Research Opportunities

<p>The AgeGuess data provide exceptional opportunities to approach research
questions across scientific fields. The research opportunities broadly split
into two main directions. The first one relates to ageing research and some of
the questions outlined in the introduction, e.g. evaluating ageing processes by
studying temporal variation in biological age and the difference between
perceived and chronological age. The second direction relates to a more
sociological view, where the users themselves are the subject of study, and
research questions center around their ability to guess ages.</p>

<p>Regarding
the first research direction, the collected data on perceived age and
chronological age can inform on the basic ageing process. The data can reveal
whether more recent birth cohorts are biologically younger than their earlier
counterparts, e.g. is a 40-year-old today biologically younger than a
40-year-old in the 1980s, and does that difference hold in the same way for
30-year-olds? We can investigate how shifts in biological age over time
accompany shifts in life expectancy. Research questions can also
focus on how ageing happens within a lifetime, i.e. do we age continuously
throughout our lives or are there boosts and arrests of ageing? Furthermore,
quantitative geneticists can exploit relatedness among persons in uploaded
photographs to study diverse questions, including to what degree biological age
is heritable, and how heritability of biological age relates to known
heritability of lifespan. The number of images is not vast, but computer
scientists can use the data to train and evaluate age estimation
algorithms. Such training and
exploration could go beyond the fast developing and advancing artificial
intelligence (AI) approaches that aim at a most accurate age estimation of an
image. Many of the currently used databases for such training of AI networks do
not include data on perceived ages and AI might use very different signals than
us humans to evaluate the age. However, as outlined above the deviation between
real age and perceived age is informative as a biomarker of ageing. AI would not
be able to detect shifts in human age perception over time that might reflect
adjustment to different biological ages. Various of the databases
that are used to train AI networks suffer from biases, e.g. images of
celebrities that might not be representative. Access to the original
pictures of AgeGuess requires a close collaboration with the AgeGuess project
due to new EU regulations on privacy of identifiable pictures of
persons.</p>

<p>The second research direction centers around the users and their
ability to guess ages. General questions about the ability to guess the age of
people include: (1) are we better at guessing the age of our own age group, (2)
does our ability to guess ages increase with experience (age or number of
previous guesses on AgeGuess), and (3) are we better at guessing the age of our
own sex or the opposite sex, and is the age of one sex easier to guess than the
other? Such questions can test hypotheses derived from sexual selection theory,
for example in the context of human partner choice. Furthermore, studying
whether it is easier to guess the age of people of our own ethnicity compared to
other ethnicities might provide information on generalities of ageing processes
and commonalities of ageing signs. The data might furthermore reveal guessing
abilities related to exposure to specific ethnic or age groups. For example,
contrary to expectation geriatric nurses, who daily work with elderly patients,
are not better at guessing ages of elderly citizens than male students.</p>

<p>As focus turns from the
subject in the photograph to the judgment, the AgeGuess data become highly
valuable for answering basic questions about information processing. More
specifically, the data provide an outstanding opportunity to investigate to what
extent can the hidden aspects of the environment be measured using perceptible
cues that correlate more or less with these unobservable parts. This problem of
inferring hidden aspects is, and has been, fundamental to human survival, and is
therefore important for cognitive psychologists and neuroscientists alike. Moreover, in their
development of AI, the cue learning problem is, with some controversy, being
studied by computer scientists. How much information about a
person can be extracted from the person’s facial features, and to what extent it
matters how different features of the face are combined in making the
judgment are certainly interesting
questions. They are also questions with potential to challenge the organisation
of a society in which judgments are done at mass scale by computers with live
access to extensive networks of cameras.</p>

<p>Here we present a unique database
rich with possibilities to study the human ageing process: the AgeGuess database
on people’s perceived and chronological ages. The database comprises &gt;220,000
perceived age guesses. The questions that we discuss are certainly not
exhaustive and are meant only as an illustration of the power of the data for
answering broad scientific questions. We believe many more questions can be
addressed using the AgeGuess data, including those that we as data collection
initiators have not thought about and may not be able to imagine. We thus
provide open access to the data free of charge, invite researchers and citizens
alike to tap into this rich resource, and look forward to seeing interesting and
unexpected results and outcomes.</p>

---

Jones, J.A.B., Nash, U.W., Vieillefont, J. <i>et al.</i> The AgeGuess database, an open online resource on chronological and perceived ages of people aged 5–100.<i>Sci Data</i> <b>6</b>, 246 (2019). <https://doi.org/10.1038/s41597-019-0245-9>

---

:point_right: [Scientific Data volume 6, Article number: 246 (2019)](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41597-019-0245-9) on [nature.com](https://www.nature.com/sdata/) official website.
